1.	Overview 
Cybersecurity vulnerabilities are present within all types of software systems because these are the weaknesses that attackers exploit. Attackers exploit these weaknesses and gain unauthorized access, cause disruptions, and compromise sensitive information. These digital systems are becoming more present within our everyday lives and the quantity and severity of these vulnerabilities are growing exponentially. We need to understand these vulnerabilities and how they evolve over time to identify trends in cybersecurity risk and informing defensive strategies. 
The goal for this project is to analyze trends in reported software vulnerabilities between 2020 and 2025 while using data from the National Vulnerability Database (NVD) maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). This project will examine the changes in numbers of vulnerabilities reported, analyze the distribution of severity levels, and patterns among the affected vendors or software products. 
To achieve this goal, two datasets will be used: vulnerability records from the NVD for the year 2020 and the vulnerability records from NVD for the year 2025. Through this we will be analyzing a five-year distribution. Each of the datasets contain detailed information on publicly disclosed vulnerabilities. This includes: the vulnerability identifier (CVE ID) and severity scoring. There are more variables as well included within the dataset but some of that information was considered classified and therefore removed from the dataset to ensure compliance with ethical standards. 
This project will start off by preparing the dataset which will involve cleaning the data, regulating formatting for consistency, and selecting attributes to perform analysis. The datasets will be integrated under their shared attributes which might be a full join in my case. By using exploratory data analysis, we will examine patterns found within vulnerability frequencies and their severities. We will use visualizations and summary statistics to illustrate the trends between the two time periods. These results will help shape how cybersecurity has changed over time and may provide insights into future mitigation strategies.
2.	Team 
Monica is responsible for: data collection and dataset preparation, documentation, and metadata. Data cleaning, integration, exploratory data analysis, visualizations, and writing final report. 

3.	Research Questions
1.	How has the total amount of reported vulnerabilities shifted between 2020 and 2025?
2.	How has the total distribution of vulnerability severity scores changed between 2020 and 2025?
3.	What type of vulnerabilities are becoming more common? Lower severity or critical severity?
4.	Datasets 
This project will use two datasets from the National Vulnerability Database (NVD), which is maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The NVD has a standardized definition for what a vulnerability is and what they define it as. Each vulnerability has a CVE identifier which it is associated with and there allowing for public sharing and reproducibility. 
The first dataset contains vulnerability records published for the year 2020. Each record in this dataset contains their unique vulnerability identifier. The dataset holds important attributes such as CVE identifier, its published date, vulnerability description, and its severity score count which is calculated by the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS). The CVSS score provide a standardized measure of severity which usually ranges from Low to high. 
5. Timeline 
During the first phase of the project, we will identify and download the datasets from the NVD and ensure that the datasets are properly structured and have all the necessary files for analysis. 
The second phase will have data cleaning and preprocessing. This will include selection of relevant attributes, removing unnecessary fields, dealing with missing values, and having consistent formatting with the merging of the two datasets. The datasets will be prepped for comparison by standardizing variable names and data types. 
For phase three, this stage will focus on exploratory data analysis. We will calculate descriptive statistics to showcase total number of vulnerabilities reported in their respective year and the average severity score.
The fourth phase will include interpreting the analysis results and identifying trends. We will evaluate whether significant differences exist between the two time periods and provide possible explanations for the patterns observed. 
Finally, the final report will be written which will include the research questions, dataset sources, analytical methods, results, conclusions, and future work. 
5.	Constraints 
There are several limitations which will affect this project. The biggest challenge will be change in vulnerability reporting over time. The NVD strives to stay current with changing times, the increase in number of vulnerabilities reported, may reflect an improvement in detection. This can be contrary to the amount of vulnerabilities reported by an actual increase in lack of software security. 
Another limitation is the dataset containing incomplete or inconsistent information. One variable in this dataset specifically will have trouble with this and that is descriptions. Descriptions can possibly contain many unique values which will not prove to be useful for our analysis. Data cleaning will be an important step in ensuring the datasets can be properly used for meaningful comparisons. 
Since our analysis will be focused on vulnerabilities reported within two specific years rather than a continuous dataset covering multiple years, we may not be able to fully capture long-term trends. We may also fail to capture fluctuations within vulnerability reporting. 
Lastly, vulnerability severity scores are based off of standardized scoring models but these models may not perfectly capture real-world risk. This vulnerabilities may appear severe according to scoring metrics but may not contain as much risk in action. 
6.	Gaps
There are several gray areas where additional information or data may be needed to improve analysis. For example, if we were to include more datasets from additional years, we could allow for a more comprehensive data analysis flow for long-term trends. This could help showcase not only more trends but also help define for a clearer future work project. 
Another potential gap is the lack of context within these vulnerabilities and their real-world implications. This is where implementation of vulnerability data on datasets that include actual cyber incidents could provide deeper insights into how these vulnerabilities would translate into security threats. 
There is also the potential limit for analysis within this dataset. There are only so many variables we will able to analyze which may cause a stopping point for further analysis. 
